Well, good morning, Minister. Good morning, members,
everyone in attendance. It's good to have you here.
Before we start, I'll just lay out a few ground rules.
If everyone in the auditorium can please be
respectful of proceedings and keep it orderly.
I've
let the opposition leader member know that we will
be doing what we do in the House effectively, one primary and three
supplementaries, and then we'll open it up to other folks.
That doesn't preclude you from coming in with additional questions, as
you so wish. I will endeavor to give around two-thirds of the
questioning to the opposition members.
Mr. Chair, just a clarification. On the supplementaries rule-
Yes
... I'm assuming that's flexible.
If our member's developing a particular line that's going
somewhere, you won't be cutting them off at three as a matter of course.
I'll use my discretion on that, Dr. Weatherley.
Yeah, I was just wondering if it's about that line of questioning.
That free flow of questioning? Yeah.
I do appreciate that, but I also acknowledge that we have an hour and members
from a number of opposition parties and from the government.
But I do take your point.
All right. Let's
keep it clean and have fun. Minister, we have you in here for an
hour. That gives you three minutes to make some introductory remarks, and then
we'll open up for questions. Over to you.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and members of the committee.
I'd like to begin by acknowledging the thousands of health professionals working
across our health system every day.
Doctors, nurses, midwives, allied health professionals, healthcare assistants,
support staff, who are the backbone of our health system.
Their dedication and professionalism make an enormous difference to the lives of
New Zealanders, and I thank them for the work they do.
Here with Audrey Sonnet, Director General of Health, and with Dr.
Dale Bramley, Chief Executive of Health New Zealand, and other officials who are
available to answer questions.
This government's focus is to ensure New Zealanders have access to timely, quality
care they deserve. After years of New Zealanders experiencing growing waiting lists
and declining performance, we're turning the system around by fixing the basics and
building the future of a system that delivers for the people who rely on it.
Progress is being made in a number of key areas.
We're on track for a record number of elective surgeries to be delivered this year.
Childhood immunization rates continue to increase for two-year-olds, with the
largest increases in Maori and Pacific communities.
Patients are spending less time waiting in EDs.
More patients are receiving cancer treatments they otherwise wouldn't have had
access to. And across the system, there's a renewed focus on performance,
delivery, and outcomes.
However, there is still more work to do, and Budget '26 builds on this progress.
This year's budget delivered a record level of investment in health.
Total core Crown health spending will reach $34.2 billion in
'26, '27, an increase of more than 6% on the previous year.
Total Vote Health funding will exceed $33 billion.
Budget '26 provides more than $5.8 billion in new operating funding for Vote
Health across the forecast period.
Importantly, alongside funding to support frontline delivery, Budget '26
invests in targeted initiatives that will improve outcomes for patients and
families.
Lowering the eligibility of the national bulk bowel screening program to 56, the
next step in our plan to match our screening age with Australia.
Strengthening road ambulance services.
Additional funding for Pharmac to respond to growing demand and improve access to
medicines. Additional support for mothers and babies, enabling longer post-birth
stays in hospitals and primary maternity units.
Establishing a nationally coordinated specialist pediatric palliative care service
providing compassionate support for children and families facing some of life's
most difficult circumstances. As well as investment in cybersecurity to better
support the health system, and investment to modernize Health New Zealand's digital
systems.
Budget '26 also invests more than $680 million into
strengthening hospital infrastructure, such as a new 158-bed
ward tower at Whangarei Hospital, planning enabling works for major redevelopments
at Tauranga, Hawke's Bay, and Palmerston North hospitals, acquisition of land for a
future hospital in South Auckland, infrastructure upgrades at Auckland's Mason
Clinic. The budget also supports the continued construction of the new Dunedin
Hospital inpatient building and the establishment costs for the new medical school
at the University of Waikato.
Mr. Chair, the government has set a clear direction for our health system.
The government is restoring a culture of performance and accountability.
We're investing in frontline services.
We're rebuilding health infrastructure, growing the workforce, and are maintaining
a relentless focus on delivering results for patients.
With that, happy to answer questions.
Thank you, Minister. Dr. Vera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Minister. Your commitment to a three-day postnatal stay is
included in this budget. How did you cost the
entitlement for the first two years, where $1.6
million is allocated each year for that
commitment?
Yeah. So the
ministry provided advice to me as the minister in
relation to
the implementation of this policy.
And as members of this committee will know, having sat on the committee which
considered the bill,
the implementation
has been part of the conversation around how this would be delivered.
On budget day, we announced that the government-- or the day after budget, we
announced the government intends to phase the bill's implementation to ensure the
system is ready to deliver the entitlement safely Health New
Zealand will begin by using existing capacity and will then work closely with
maternity providers to meet local community needs.
The funding will be rolled out through a staged implementation over three years,
allowing time to grow both workforce and bed capacity.
First-time mothers will be prioritized in the first two years where capacity
already exists, with full access for all women by the end of year
three. This approach gives Health New Zealand time to plan carefully and build
capacity, while still moving quickly to improve care and support for
babies and families. Health New Zealand will prepare annual implementation plans
and report progress and uptake to the government, including a formal review after
the first 18 months. And so, the answer to that question is
that we will be phasing the implementation over a period of time.
And as I said, the first step will be to make sure that the entitlement is for
first mothers in areas where there is
capacity, whilst then working with community providers
to grow that capacity, so that at the end of three years, that entitlement is for
all mothers.
How many
new mothers are there each year, and how many will
be able to use this entitlement given that only
$1.6 million is budgeted each year?
So, the work is now underway around the
implementation plan. So, that was what I just said in the last point there.
Health New Zealand-
So you don't know
... will prepare annual implementation plans and report progress,
and uptake to the government, including a formal review after the first 18 months.
And so, the select committee report was very clear that
there needs to be a clear implementation timeframe.
What we said is that this would be implemented over a period of time.
It's not being done overnight because the workforce needs to grow.
We need to make sure the capacity exists through community
providers. And so, there are some districts where
that capacity
will exist, and the implementation plan will then highlight that.
And from that point, once that's put together,
then there'll be
the opportunity to announce which districts that
entitlement will be provided. But the reality is, we are doing this
over a period of time to make sure that we can successfully implement
this policy, as I highlighted in my opening remarks there.
Well, Minister, given you're not willing to share numbers with us, my
estimate is that only 2,500 bed nights can be
purchased with that $1.6 million.
So, can you guarantee how many women will have this
entitlement that you're going to put into law in the first two
years?
So, there will be additional bed nights that will be able to be increased by
providing additional staffing or increasing capacity at community providers.
Health New Zealand will also be looking at-
But you need to pay the community providers-
Health New Zealand-
... presumably more than $1.6 million-
Hon Charles Chauvel is trying to answer
... to try to answer.
Health New Zealand will also be looking at where that capacity already
exists. And in some districts, I'm advised there will be existing
capacity
where that entitlement can be provided.
So, the number will be a lot greater than what you've suggested, but that's why we
will be having an implementation plan.
So, the law has to go through Parliament, so that's the next step.
As I said, the government will be phasing the bill's
implementation. So there will be an amendment paper to phase the implementation
plan as announced as part of the budget.
And that will then determine the staging of this entitlement.
Within three years of the bill passing, the entitlement will be available for all
mothers. And so, the issue here is
that, as was highlighted as part of the select committee process,
this was something which received support from across the House.
But of course, there were concerns raised around the ability to implement this.
And we want to do this in a way that is implementable over a period
of time, and within three years of the law passing, it will be fully
implemented.
Supplementary. I note that
when the policy is fully implemented in
the final year of the
forecast period, the amount funded is half what the
ministry estimated in its
original advice to this committee.
Why are you only funding half the entitlement that your
officials thought was necessary?
So, there's modeling that the officials have provided to me around
what the expected uptake will be.
And so, that uptake is expected. So, the entitlement will be there for all mothers.
The expected uptake is not
all mothers will necessarily choose to take up that uptake.
And so, the funding has been allocated.
Of course, if the uptake is higher,
that will be something which Health New Zealand will need to address.
But the point is, we've had modeling which is provided to us, which assumes that
not all mothers necessarily will take up the uptake, but at all-
So what's the point of your law that you're passing saying all mothers can get it?
Well, all mothers will be able to get it.
Unless half the other mothers choose to take it.
No, all mothers will be entitled to it.
This is a fantasy.
No, it's not.
Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. The minister's trying to answer. Please don't interject.
The answer to your question is, we are funding
the implementation of the legislation, and we
are-
Jenny
... have received modeling from the Ministry of Health in relation to what
percentage of mothers are likely to
take up the entitlement, but the entitlement will exist for all mothers.
I've noted that-
And that is something which-
... sorry, actually. I'll come back to you
...
for many
government initiatives,
there is modeling taken into account when making decisions around how it is to
be implemented.
Jenny Marcroft has a sup. I'll come back to Charles.
Thank you, Minister. And as you noted, the committee
looked at the piece of legislation-
Mm
... which was a member's bill. It's now become a government piece of work,
noting also that it's part of the National New Zealand
First Coalition-
Correct
... Agreement to proceed this piece of work.
When is your expected timeline for that legislation to be passed?
Is it prior to the House rising?
It is prior to the House rising, correct.
Yes, it's a priority within the coalition agreement, and it is a priority to get
passed before Parliament concludes at the end of September.
Thank you. Dr. Vero.
My question is to the director general.
Director general, the ministry advised-
Sorry, is this a primary or-
No, it's the same. It's the same question-
Supplementary, yeah
... supplementary question. The ministry advised me when I was
minister that this policy couldn't be implemented.
It then advised the committee that the cost would be twice what was
budgeted. Can you assure the committee that the
costings in the budget are sufficient to
deliver the policy that is in the bill?
So the
implementation is that this will be phased, and so for the first couple of years,
it only applies to first-time mothers.
First-time mothers already have a length of stay around two and a half
days. So in terms of the modeling that we have done, it
tests a number of different assumptions of uptake.
Some mothers, particularly second and third, are not as likely to take it up.
But we will want to be monitoring what that uptake looks like.
So to be clear then, the reason your
advice has changed is because you're assuming,
firstly, that first-time moms in the first two years
already stay nearly three days, and secondly, that
uptake will not be the 100% that was in your advice to the
committee when the bill was before the committee.
Yes, that's correct. The average length of stay for first-time mothers is around
two and a half days.
Obviously, some are less than that, and some are more.
But yes-
Two further questions.
Can you assure the committee that the ministry won't change
its position on this again after the election?
Sorry, in what way?
What risks do you see to being able to deliver the
entitlement that is in the bill?
As
the minister outlined, there is some capacity in the system already.
I think we'll be wanting to monitor uptake to ensure that the
capacity meets the
uptake that we start to see as it rolls through.
And that's one of the things we'll be monitoring.
It's exactly the same.
And Health New Zealand will be keeping an eye on that, and we will update ministers
if we see things-
I'm just wondering-
... moving away from our assumptions in the modeling, which we always use for
modeling. I'm sure as the minister stated, different scenarios,
and we will be wanting to-
The issue is the bill is an entitlement.
The second point is that is any of this
existing capacity in the health system
other women's health services that, for example, is delivering
elective gynecology services that would mean women would miss out
once this entitlement is in place?
No. The capacity we've looked at is
what Health New Zealand tells us it has available and
then
community
capacity.
Hamish Campbell. Excellent. Brilliant. Final.
Minister, what is the government doing to strengthen primary care services across
New Zealand?
Well, thank you for the questions.
A range of things that the government is doing to strengthen primary care
services. As you are aware, part of the uplift in funding to Health New Zealand
is for hospital specialist services.
Part of it is for primary and community care services.
And a big focus of our government is to improve access
to primary care, make it easier for people to be able to see a doctor.
The number one concern for patients is the ability to be able
to get timely access to a doctor's appointment.
And so that's been a big focus. Last year's budget, of course, included the Primary
Care Tactical Action Plan, which had a range of initiatives in that
which are currently being implemented.
We've seen in the last 12 months
a significant reduction in the number of
practices which have closed books, which is good to see.
We're seeing
more patients get access to urgent and after-hours care with
clinics opening. For example, in Lower Hutt, in South Auckland, it's now got a
24/7 urgent after-hours care clinic.
Our online GP service is providing another option for patients who
can't get an appointment in a timely manner with their own GP.
And of course, we're also strengthening the workforce with our focus on
supporting NZ rec doctors to be able to start their careers in primary care,
the upskilling of our nurses to become nurse practitioners and
nurse prescribers,
and the Waikato Medical School is now under construction, which is, I think,
a big step forward to provide a long-term pipeline
of GPs, particularly in regional and rural New Zealand.
So we're seeing progress, which is good to see. There's a lot more work to do.
There's no single silver bullet
to making it easier for people to be able to get access to a GP
appointment. But there are many initiatives that we need to continue to do, and
that's what we continue to focus on.
Excellent. You talk about improving access to a GP.
How will recent investments help that
situation?
So the number of investments, obviously, last year's budget included a big uplift
in funding for primary care. There's current negotiations now underway
around this year's uplift in funding for primary care, and
that's very much focused around how to continue to improve access
to primary care and improve access to GPs in the community.
As I said, the number one issue for patients is the ability to get a timely
appointment. That's their number one concern.
And our focus is making sure that we can increase the workforce,
strengthen the workforce,
and also increase access, such as
the investment around urgent and after-hours care clinics, which has, I said,
making a big difference in some of those communities where access to primary care
has been a big challenge.
Mm. So you touched on briefly there the access to urgent
after-hours healthcare services.
What action are you taking to improve access there?
Well, so the urgent after-hours care framework is now being rolled out
across the country.
And so there's been a number of clinics, I think, which have been
Um, opened, uh, in Dunedin. There's a new 24/7 urgent after-hours care
clinic, which is now open. South Auckland, there's a new urgent after-hours care
clinic, which is open. Uh, and in Hutt South, there's now a new daytime
urgent after-hours care clinic, which is now
open for patients to be able to access.
And negotiations are underway now for the next tranche of those clinics across the
country to continue to make access to those clinics
available.
At the same time, there's a range of other initiatives as part of that primary care
tech collection plan which are being rolled out to improve access to primary care
for patients. And I think that's
making a difference for New Zealanders.
But as I said, there's no single solution to solving that problem.
There is a large number of
things that need to be done, and we're working on all of those.
Yes. Thank you.
All right. I've got supps from Jenny, Huhana, and Carlos.
Jenny.
Th- thank you.
Changes for funding for GPs, noting that happened, there
was an increase in funding the last budget and changes now.
Can you talk through
changes to the capitation model, which is what we hear often-
Mm
... from our GPs? And so also what then does the GP
funding look like into the coming year?
Yeah. That's a good question. So Health New Zealand is currently negotiating
with primary care around the reweighting of capitation.
Particularly as part of that is
rurality being one of the criteria which is being
included. The capitation formula hasn't been changed, I think,
since the early 2000s. Been based on age and sex.
We're including a number of other factors as part of that to ensure that our
GPs are funded based on the needs of the patients in front of them.
And that, I think, is going to make a big difference for clinics up and down the
country. And so that negotiation's currently underway.
But as I say, the sector's been calling for that for a very long time.
And I think it really does
focus the funding based on the needs of the patients, which I think is a really
important way forward.
Quick little-
Thank you
... so when does that piece of work expected to be finished?
Well, the new financial year starts on the 1st of July, and so the
negotiations are currently underway, with anticipation to have that in
place for the new financial year.
Thank you.
Okay. Supplementary Huhana.
Yeah.
We'll come to Carlos-
As we're on primary care
... and then Hasher.
Wanting to examine with the minister around immunization-
Mm
... and particularly Tamariki Ora.
So previously there was about $30 million offered to primary
care GP to increase immunization
rates for Tamariki.
Mm.
Is that funding still available or has it completely ceased?
Yes, so that's the Immunizing our Tamariki program, that is funded through
the Hauora Māori Appropriation and continues to do so.
As I said in my opening remarks, we
are seeing significant improvements in immunization rates
within our Māori and our Pasifika communities, which is positive to see.
But there's a-
There's still a gap
... there's a signal within the budget that there's going to be a decrease in terms
of funding towards immunizing our Tamariki.
So, um, that-
No, there won't be a decrease in funding towards immunizing our Tamariki.
It's a priority as part of our five health targets.
And so, who are the providers? And give us an example
of the rates that we're seeing in terms of increasing Māori access
to immunization services.
Well, as I said, in my opening remarks, Māori and Pasifika
communities are seeing some of the biggest increases in
our most recent, in the
immunizing our
for two-year-old target.
And so that is good to see. But I acknowledge that,
unfortunately, we saw a significant reduction in immunization rates under the
previous government. And we are
now having to work back to increase those rates
from quite significantly low rates.
And so that improvement will take time, but that improvement is underway.
Carlos, you've got a supplementary.
Thank you, Minister. There's always an argument between whether the funding should
be given to the primary care or the hospital care.
So by investing in primary care now, what benefit will
the hospital care will benefit, including the emergency
department or elective procedures?
Well, I think you're 100% right. Obviously, we need to invest in both.
And the budget invests-
Great idea
... in both primary care-
Never get a chance
... and also into our hospitals-
Someone should campaign on it
... to ensure that we deliver the services that New Zealanders need.
But of course, we can make investments in primary care which can reduce
pressure on our hospitals. That's a good thing.
Just this morning we announced, Minister Casey Costello and I
announced the uplift in funding for aged care for the coming-
Mm-hmm
... financial year. And that's a 4% increase in funding for aged care
across the country. Part of that agreement is
to support aged care to take
patients who are discharged on the weekend, who are typically not being discharged
on the weekends. And I think that's a big step forward.
And that'll make a big difference, particularly for our busy
hospitals,
who if they can't discharge someone who is clinically safe to
discharge on the weekend, they're still there on Monday morning.
And
that clogs up the hospital and makes it more
challenging. And that can have an impact on elective surgeries and acute lists
as well if there aren't beds available.
So it's really important that when the investments that we're making in both
primary care and in hospitals are really focused around the targets.
That's why we've brought the targets back so that we can improve
access, reduce wait time, reduce wait lists,
and get progress towards our health targets, which is what we're doing as a
government.
Okay. Dr. Vero, you had a supplementary.
On the capitation funding offer, which you have
had to revise because it threatened the sustainability of
some rural practices,
why are-
Can you guarantee now that practices won't be worse off and in a
position where they have to cut services?
So that's part of a negotiation between Health New Zealand and primary care.
And so the negotiation is active. My focus is making sure that there
is improved access across the country, particularly in rural communities.
I've made that expectation clear to Health New Zealand.
They're working through the feedback they've received from primary care clinics to
make sure they get it right. I think one of the things that's happening is there's
both the capitation
funding conversation. There's also another conversation happening
around a smaller rural funding stream, and
discussion around the allocation of that.
And both of those have been happening as part and parcel of the same conversation.
And so Health New Zealand's working through that to make sure that obviously we
improve access to primary care, both across our country and in rural
communities. And that negotiation is ongoing.
Will you rule out or will you guarantee that there won't
be increases to general practice fees for patients as a
result of these negotiations?
Well, one of the points in the negotiation is to make sure that patient fees
stay stable over the coming financial year.
And so that is part of the negotiation that's currently underway.
Doesn't stable fees just lock in the problem of
inaccessible general practice in a country where there's a cost of living
crisis and 650,000 people-
So-
... can't afford to go to the doctor?
Well, look, if you're trying to suggest that people earning
around $300,000, like myself and Chris Hipkins, should get free GP
visits, I think that is an untargeted policy and-
Yeah, we're not making policy for the 1%
... and that is an untargeted pol- even if you do, so that is an
untargeted policy, and that would simply, by having untargeted policies,
clog up the access to GPs. The number one issue for patients
right now is accessing a doctor, being able to get an appointment.
And so what we're focused on doing is targeting resource to where it makes the
most difference, to get the best difference for patients.
And of course, in New Zealand, we have a number of schemes which provide
support to those on lower incomes, those in very low cost
access areas, and also to those for children under
the age of 13, 14.
Supplementary-
So we have t- we, we focus on targeted support-
Under the Plane of Ordinary Care-
... not clogging up the system, which is the alternative being proposed.
Supplementary.
Is that supplementary? We'll go to Ayesha for one more, and then I'll come to
Hamish.
Is it your position then, because of your concern about a
handful of high income earners, you're prepared to let
650,000 New Zealanders
be unable to access care, as is currently the case?
What our focus is on doing is ac- making it
easier to see a doctor in New Zealand, not clogging up the
system, which is what you are proposing.
So our focus is on making it easier to see a doctor-
650,000 people
... and targeting resource to those who need it the
most. And, that is, I think ma- and, and if you look at what
we've achieved, we're seeing more practices with their books open.
We're seeing
more opportunities for people to be able to see a doctor.
We're targeting support to those who need it the most, and we're currently in
negotiations around keeping fees stable in this current coming financial year.
Dr. Campbell.
Thank you. Just following off of that line of questioning.
Isn't one of the problems that actually we haven't been training enough doctors
over the last decade
to get GPs out into rural areas? What do you see,
how, what are you doing to increase the number of GPs available-
Yeah, well, there's no simple-
... to kind of actually have more capacity?
Yeah, well, there's no single silver bullet to solving this challenge, which some
people think there is. There is no single simple solution.
If there was, it would've been found by now.
There is a requirement to do many things in order to
make a difference for patients, and that's what we're doing.
So yes, training more doctors is part and parcel of what we need to do.
Reweighting capitation to ensure that rural practices
are recognized for their higher cost structures is something that we need to do.
Making sure we have a third medical school, which I note the opposition opposed,
is something that we need to invest in.
That's what we're delivering as a government, and so it's not one
single simple solution. It is many things that need to be
done to improve access for patients, and that is what I as the minister am
focused on doing, improving access for patients up and down our country.
All right. We've got three primaries.
Uh, Huhana, then Carlos, and then Ayesha.
Kia ora.
Huhana, and I'll go for primaries.
Thank you, Minister.
Then Carlos.
How does the government give effect to Te Tiriti o Waitangi in the current health
system, considering the disestablishment of Te Aka Whai Ora and the
relegation of Iwi Māori partnership boards in the system?
Well, we give it, we, we are focused on making sure that all New Zealanders have
access to timely quality access to healthcare.
That's why we've reinstated the health targets, because we want to make sure that
the system is focused on patients, fo- focused on improving access
for all New Zealanders, regardless of their ethnicity.
And so does the minister-
So that's for Huhana
... that's what we as a government have done. We've implemented the health targets.
We're now focusing resource to where it makes the biggest difference.
And an example of that is our immunization, immunizing our Tamariki program, which
is something which was put in place, uh, by this government, which is working with
Hauora Māori providers who work with their communities to improve
immunization rates, which we are now seeing good progress.
And so does the minister believe that Māori have equal health outcomes to
non-Māori?
Uh, there's, there is... I mean, if you look at just immunizing our, uh,
immunization rates for our two-year-olds, uh, it's very clear from the evidence
that, uh, Māori populations have a lower immunization rate
than, than non-Māori populations, which means we have work to do.
Uh, and that's why we are foc-
Beyond immunization
... that's why we are, um, improving, uh, inve- we're investing
in, in Hauora Māori partners who work with Māori communities,
um, who know their communities, um, and who are s- who we're seeing some good,
good, good results from. So there's a number of things that we're doing to make
sure that we improve access and improve, um-
Outcomes across the board for all New Zealanders.
So Hauora Māori appropriation is about some 2% of
overall Vote Health.
How do you think that
budget really compares to the health inequities that Māori experience in the health
system?
Well, the health system treats people regardless of whether they
are Māori or non-Māori, and the health
budget is there for all New Zealanders.
So 100% of the health budget is there for all New Zealanders, and it's there to
ensure that we get better outcomes for all New Zealanders.
And so, Minister,
we've seen a cut in this budget to Hauora Māori overall, some
$11 million.
Where will we see those cuts, and how is the Hauora Māori
appropriation being spent to improve health outcomes for Te Reo Māori?
I'll ask Audrey to speak to the changes in that appropriation.
So last year's appropriation had a one-off
expense transfer from the year before of
47.2 million.
Mm-hmm.
We expect that there will be underspend in last year, and
when the finalized numbers, we would expect to transfer some of that into
next year, and so we'd not expect that in the final supplementaries
you'll see a decrease overall.
So the Hauora Māori appropriation is quite broad-
Mm.
-and it's very hard to understand
what is being funded and for what outcomes.
Can we get a description as to what is going to be funded in the Hauora
Māori appropriation and what services are being cut?
Well, we're investing in improved access for patients.
I'm happy to come back to the committee with particular details of specifics
around it, but immunizing our tamariki is a key initiative within that.
A large part of it is towards primary care providers,
and providers of services in the community.
So it is all about investing in better services in our
community. But overall, our health budget there is to improve outcomes for all New
Zealanders.
Primary.
Thank you, Minister. One thing you've been emphasizing Budget 2026
is the additional $5.5 billion allocated to the front
line health service. What is the intent purpose for this additional funding?
So there's a number of key purposes of that funding.
So part of that is to provide uplift in funding to hospital and specialist
services,
and that includes
support for all of the services that our hospitals provide.
We've put our five health targets in place, which very much are around
focusing and supporting improved access, reduced wait times, reduced wait
lists. As I said, this year we're expecting a record number of
elective surgeries to have been delivered.
We're on target for what we said we'd deliver, which is a record number,
and that's about reducing wait times for elective surgeries after they increased
significantly under the previous government.
The other big major allocation is primary community care.
So we talked earlier about the investment into our GP clinics, but
also aged care, pharmacy, other key services that people
rely on in the community. So aged care, we've announced earlier
today the negotiation of the uplift, 4%
uplift in funding for aged care provision.
And as I said, that's going to make a difference for
particularly patients being able to be discharged on weekends through aged
care providers. And that's a big step forward to support early discharge,
and to ensure those hospital beds are able to be there for the next patient who
needs them. So,
and there's a range of other initiatives that are being funded as well,
as initiatives on top of the cost pressure funding,
which includes the initiatives around bowel screening, includes initiatives around
the postnatal stays, it includes the initiative on pediatric palliative
care, which I think is a big step forward to make sure that we
have
a service available for
parents and their families where children unfortunately pass
away or have life-limiting conditions.
Having that nationwide service I think is going to be a big step forward for our
country and something that's been called for a very long time.
So my question also is, I think a lot of healthcare workers also mentioned that
will this additional funding be sufficient to address the
underinvestment in front line health service over the past 10 years?
So this is about improving access and improving funding, and so
it is a significant uplift,
and it's about strengthening the workforce as part of that as well.
We've put in place our health targets, and that's about saying,
as a system, we want
Health New Zealand focused on patients-
Mm.
-and on those health targets. We've set
milestones, annual milestones for those targets.
We're seeing year-on-year improvement-
Thank you.
-against those targets, which is good to see.
But I acknowledge there's still a long way to go, a lot more work to do.
Mm.
And that's my expectation very clearly of Health New Zealand, that they should keep
delivering against those expectations.
Thank you.
Okay.
Primary, Dr. Vera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You published a
health infrastructure plan in last April.
Official advice priced that at $20
billion over 10 years. The health
capital envelope has been increased by 600 million.
Nowhere near the amount estimated by the Infrastructure Commission
or, even just by looking at the track to get to 20 billion-
Mm.
-needed to fund that plan. How are you going
to make up the difference?
Yeah, so there's a number of key investments in capital infrastructure in this
year's budget. The Whangarei water tower,
which
brings the funding package for that project
together,
and that's critical to ensure that the Whangarei redevelopment-
Excuse me, Minister, my question was about the difference-
Is done.
-between what you've funded and what's set out in the plan.
Yeah, and I know in 2023 when you were the minister, $0 was allocated towards
capital expenditure. When you were the Minister of Health.
So we added over a billion dollars last year, over 600 million this
year. Health New Zealand also has its own capital budget, which it allocates
within its own budget capital plans.
And the focus is very much on getting business cases
delivered,
and getting planning work done so that we can
continue to make those investments.
So three of the next major hospital rebuilds are now being
funded for the planning work that needs to be done.
I expect those business cases will come toward
budget in the next term of Parliament for quite
large sums of investment that will be required for those builds.
The planning work is now underway
for
Tauranga, Palmerston North, Hawke's Bay, and that's critically
important that we get the work done so that we can then allocate what will
be really sizable chunks of money to make
those big investments in those three hospitals.
And so we need to get the work done properly.
And if you look at the infrastructure report that was released yesterday by the
Minister for Infrastructure,
many of those recommendations were around making sure that we get the phasing done
in the appropriate manner so that we make the right decisions,
and then we can then make those sizable investments that are needed.
But we've got a $7.5 billion of capital
in the health capital
investment, funded capital currently in the health capital
investment plan right now. So there's $7.5 billion
of capital currently there for Health New Zealand.
And there's a lot being delivered across the country.
Supplementary. Minister, why won't you release
information on which projects in the health
infrastructure plan
are not able to continue
under the trajectory that you're currently on?
Well, all of those projects are at various stages.
And so for instance, in this year's budget, we're funding
the planning work on three major hospital rebuilds
that are going to cost billions of dollars in terms of cumulative
amounts of money. In terms of doing that work, it's going to cost a lot of money to
deliver those rebuilds. The work now is around planning and early
works,
which is really important to get those early works done so that
when we do allocate, when those business cases come up, asking for the full
cost of the rebuilds,
we are able to then get moving as quickly as possible on delivering the
infrastructure that's needed. And so there's a number of steps that need to be done
to get it right. We're doing that,
and that's all part of delivering the health infrastructure plan.
Yeah. Minister, your officials advised you that the health infrastructure
plan significantly exceeds previous appropriations, quote,
"May prove unaffordable," quote, "Not clearly factored
into the forecasts."
Was that from Treasury?
It's health officials. So can you please explain
what-
Oh, look, some people are unambitious.
Supplementary. Minister.
I was doing sup first.
Minister.
And then I'm coming over to...
Thank you.
I think it was sup first.
You referenced yesterday's
infrastructure plan, which I think members of Parliament
agree is a
excellent effort to achieve bipartisanship on these
long-term issues.
Why can't you be open with colleagues in Parliament
around the feasibility of the health infrastructure plan and
whether we can ever fund the items in it?
We are delivering. So the next steps of those three major hospital rebuilds-
The question was about sharing information-
Has been funded
... not what you're doing
... post that, bro.
Well, if there's specific questions that you wish to ask, I'm happy for you to put
that in writing.
Well, I have, and I've appealed it to the Ombudsman because you're not giving out
information on this infrastructure plan.
And the answer to your question around those three hospital rebuilds is the next
stages have been funded.
I asked about the infrastructure plan, not about three hospitals.
Carlos, sup.
Mr. Chair.
Yesterday I was in the Infrastructure Committee.
So we talk about how we manage our assets.
We currently, the way we do it is fourth to the last in,
think OECD on the region. With the new
released asset management work plan, how this will change the
way we manage or maintain and renew our assets in the health
sector?
So I think, as I said, we need to move to
a more staged approach to how we do these investments.
And that is one of the ways which I think the infrastructure plan has highlighted
the need to do so,
and to work,
to deliver good planning, good business cases,
early works, packages, which gets projects into a
place where we understand the costs, we know what's
needed to be delivered. We can then get on and get things delivered as quickly as
possible.
And so I think that's a really important change, which Health New Zealand is
progressing. But also more standardized designs is, I
think, another thing which
we've been clear as a government we want to see across governments, more
standardized designs,
to ensure that we can get more efficient builds, faster builds, but
also more cost effective to maintain and more
efficient to build as well, and more timely to build.
So there's a number of things across government that we are working on
to make sure that, when it comes to infrastructure, we have
a much more sensible approach to doing it,
rather than
it being
different ways of doing things across different agencies or across
different parts of the country.
And that, I think standardization is something which many parts of the industry
have also been calling for because it means they can then get better pipeline of
work, understand what's coming,
and are able to deliver things a lot faster and build
what they need around skills and equipment and things to be able to get
infrastructure done in a much faster way.
So do you think that if we actually change the way we managed the assets in
the past 10 years,
which government probably costs more than it needs, we
can relocate those funding to actually invest in more
capital and more assets for our healthcare system?
Yeah. If we can make sure that we build things in a more
standardized way, we're able to make it
more cost effective to operate and more cost effective to maintain
those assets. And that obviously improves the quality of infrastructure.
We've got a very old health infrastructure
across the health system in New Zealand.
And so this is not a challenge that's going to be resolved overnight, but does
require a set of principles to be applied and be applied
consistently in order to make sure we get better asset management, better
improvement, and also make sure the new infrastructure that is built is
built to a more standardized design around how it can be delivered.
Thank you, Minister.
Janine has this up.
So obviously there's
a lot of health infrastructure
that needs fixing up,
and new builds that you've put into the budget.
Why are you looking so far ahead in terms of land
purchase in South Auckland? What's the impetus behind doing that
when that's a-
Yeah
... a wee way into the future when the needs are right now?
Yeah. So that's a good question. So as you will note in the budget,
funding has been set aside to purchase land for a new hospital in South Auckland.
The Drury
area in South Auckland is expected to house up to the same
population as Hamilton over the next
20 years. There's a huge amount of infrastructure being built in that area,
motorway widening, new railway stations going in.
I think there's a
lot of new commercial property going in, a new mall,
et cetera. So there's a huge amount of investment going into that area.
We know there's going to be a population of
similar size to Hamilton. And that population, South
Auckland, North Waikato, has been identified as a priority area
for a new hospital that's going to be needed to be built.
The cheapest time to buy that land is now, and particularly if we want to have
it, land close to
major infrastructure. So for example, train stations
and motorways. If we want to have land which is
accessible, we need to be there now
getting and buying land. So that's what's been funded in the budget.
And I believe that's a very good investment,
to make sure that we are building for the future, preparing for the future.
It's going to be needed. Obviously, there'll be a lot more work that'll be required
following the purchase of that land.
But that land in that part of Auckland is being purchased
up very quickly,
and being proposed for proposed developments very quickly.
If we want to be in a strategic location, we need to get in there quickly and find
that location and buy it.
All right.
I'm going to move on because I just need to balance-
Yeah. Yep, sure
... who gets what. So I'll go to Huhana.
Yeah, Huhana for your primary.
Thank you. Minister, news is out that you've
decided not to reappoint Dr Rachel Love and Simon
Watt as the leadership of the New Zealand Medical Council.
There's been an allergic reaction from health leadership across the sector,
where you had said publicly that they are pushing an
ideological agenda.
Health and wellbeing, these regulatory bodies
set standards that are evidence-based, and
you're alleging that somehow cultural safety and prioritizing Hauora
Maori is some ideological agenda.
How can that be when this body has been there and
doing the work based on the profession and the standards of care for
all New Zealanders?
Yeah, I think that question's a bit further outside of the estimates,
but I'm happy to answer the question if the chair allows.
Effect- effectively-
It impacts patient care.
Yeah, sure. Look, I'm happy to answer the question.
The answer to your question is that firstly,
this is a ministerial appointment. Ministers make ministerial appointments.
That's what ministers do.
And those decisions are for ministers to make recommendations to
Cabinet,
and Cabinet then
makes decisions. That's what's happened in this case.
In terms of the issues,
we've been clear as the government, we expect healthcare to be based on patients'
need. And
in my view, and in
the government's view, there has been,
for the Medical Council, their recent consultation that they put out, there was a
significant reaction to it from many parts of
the community,
including many in the medical workforce.
And the focus that we have as a government is for the Medical Council to
be focused on-
So the-
... improving access, strengthening the workforce,
not dismantling systems, which is what was being outlined
in that discussion document or in that proposal.
Where-
The standard is being set-
When it comes to core, when it comes to-
... by a professional body, evidence-based.
Hold on, Huhana. Let the minister answer, please.
And ministers under the law ultimately make appointments,
and that is for ministers to make.
Yeah. And the standards being set have been considered-
Point of order, Mr Chair
... and are evidence-based.
Okay. Chair.
And ultimately, why is the minister-
Point of order. Point of order, Hamish Campbell.
Can I just
raise Speaking's Rulings 144-1?
Yes.
When it kind of comes to the relevance and scope of estimates
questions,
questions about policy or recent events that are
in no way discernibly linked to the government's proposed spending plan should be
ruled as irrelevant.
So it's centered the government's gender.
No, but the point-
It's central to-
Do you want to speak to the point of order?
... the delivery of our services.
Yeah, I'll speak to the point of order.
Go ahead.
Chair, that was raised earlier.
Yes.
The minister Said, would the Chair give me leave?
Can I answer the question? The Chair said, "Yes." So the question was ruled in
order by the Chair.
And you're both right. Yes, it's outside of the scope, and the minister did
mention that, but he then also did say that he was happy to answer the question.
Hmm.
So he is answering the question. So you can have one more,
and then we'll move on, because I know other members have-
No.
Oh, Dr.
I would like a supplementary on that question
... supplementary as well.
After you.
Yeah, no. Kate Hipaki, you take the one sup.
Minister, you have been reported that you didn't just make a
decision, you made a decision based on the Medical Council's
work on cultural
safety.
Why are you better able to make a
decision on how patients and their culture
should be respected than the members of the Medical Council?
Ministers make decisions every day on ministerial requirements.
Yeah, well take some responsibility for one.
I've taken responsibility for this decision.
I made this decision. Recommendation was put.
We made a decision
as
a cabinet,
and we've been very clear about the reasons why.
All right. We're going to move on.
Dr. Campbell had a primary.
Excellent. Thank you.
Cancer is a very important issue facing New Zealand.
What is the government doing to improve access to cancer medications?
Well, there's a range of initiatives underway to improve access
to cancer medicines.
Last year's budget,
there was a significant uplift in funding for Pharmac, which has
provided
33 additional new cancer medicines.
Pharmac continues as well to go through its process of assessing new
medicines and to make sure that its budget is going towards the highest
priorities. And we've seen
a number of additional medicines also be funded, I think seven new
cancer medicines also been funded through
that process for breast cancer, lung cancer, large
cell lymphoma, chronic lymphatic-
Lymphoma
... leukemia, melanoma. So a range of medicines have also
been funded for a range of cancers by
Pharmac doing the work that it does.
We're also seeing a rollout of additional
infusion capability across the country, which
is not only increasing the capacity of infusion
capability
in many of our current infusion services,
but also expanding access by opening new infusion
services.
Waitakere Hospital, for instance,
population of West Auckland up until now
had to travel into Auckland City Hospital in order to be able to access
infusion services. That's now changed due to that
investment, and I think that's really exciting.
So the population of West Auckland now both
have access to infusions
at Waitakere Hospital, but also at Whanau House in
West Auckland. There is a community-based infusion center that has also been opened
in the last couple of months. And so there
are further
services to be opened, an increase in capacity at Nelson Hospital,
community infusion in South Auckland,
investment into infusion capability at North Shore Hospital
in Christchurch, Dargaville, Kaitaia, Greenlane,
further investment into Manukau, Hawera, Rolleston.
And so right across the country, we're seeing
further access to medicines, but also these
infusion capacity as well, which I think is making a real difference for patients
up and down our country.
Excellent. What progress has been made in expanding
eligibility for cancer screening programs?
So there's been two key changes that we've made.
And the first one has been around
breast cancer screening, which that rollout is currently underway,
and that's making a big difference.
So-
We've also
funded in this year's budget the next step to match the bowel
screening age with Australia.
And so that is to reduce,
and that rollout
is to reduce the age down to 56
as the next step. Alongside that,
Health New Zealand is implementing the fit for symptomatic test
in all districts this year.
That is a really important part of
freeing up access to colonoscopy, so that is being rolled out across the country
this year into all districts.
It's
a similar type of test. It's a poo test,
but it has a different
sensitivity,
and that is for GPs to be able to refer patients who would otherwise be
referred for a colonoscopy to be able to be referred for
a fit for symptomatic test. Which enables more patients to
be able to get access to that test as well.
And so that's being rolled out, and that will be available to all patients of any
age. So if someone has bowel cancer symptoms,
their doctor will be able to
refer them for a fit for symptomatic test, and that's being rolled out across the
country this year. And I think that's a really big step forward alongside the age
reduction as we work to match Australia.
Thanks. Supplementary, Dr. Farrow.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I received a letter about the breast cancer
screening age extension that you mentioned from Wendy Anderson of
Christchurch on Monday. She said, "I had my last breast screen examination in
January 22, age 69. Two years later, I rang thinking
I'd be entitled to another, but was told it was only being carried out in Nelson
Marlborough region as a pilot study.
Today I rang, as I'm now 73, and want to be seen prior to the
74-year-old age cutoff point," as she puts it,
"only to be told that women in this group will not be seen until after their 74th
birthday and have to do it before their 75th.
For me, that will be 5.3 years without screening."
She asks, how can you say you're offering screening to this group when the fact is,
women like me are being left out?
So under the changes this government has implemented,
she'll be eligible for a further scan,
other than a further screen at the age of 74, as outlined in that letter.
And that is part of the rollout of the age extension,
which is currently underway to ensure that we increase the
age to 74. And one of the key changes as part of the rollout
is, of course, the age is increasing every year.
But importantly,
the 74-year-old additional scan was also
included, so that anyone within that age bracket
would get one final scan at the age of 74.
And so that rollout is now currently underway.
And without the investment this government has made, there would not have
been scanning available for those women.
And so that is now currently underway, and is making a real
difference
up and down our country.
You referenced the
fit
for symptomatic test and its
ability to free up colonoscopy space.
How much colonoscopy space would the national rollout of that test
free up?
Well, I think the estimates is over 30%, in terms
of surveillance colonoscopies.
I can ask
for further detail from Dale on that particular question.
But,
as I said, that's being rolled out currently to all districts, I think, by
September this year. So that rollout is currently underway,
so that by the end of this year, all districts will have access to the fit
for symptomatic. It's a big change in the system,
and as I said, it will free up access to colonoscopies, which will then enable
further age reductions in the bowel screening
age.
Right. Did you want to add more?
You have one more sentence.
Yes, that's right, Minister. We are expecting it will free up
thousands of colonoscopies. We're also releasing national clinical guidance
to all clinicians and districts, so that they can understand
the evidence base behind the test, but also how to apply the
test.
Because
it's a more sensitive cutoff marker,
we just want to make sure that people can understand that, and also not
unnecessarily then send on to colonoscopy.
So that is going to take a bit of time to make sure that all of our clinicians
fully understand the guidelines that will be issued.
Is there any concern about cancers being missed in
this cohort of symptomatic people by
using the fit test rather than
colonoscopy? And how
frequent would that situation arise?
So that's exactly why we've looked to
standardize clinical guidance with evidence base
around it. So each test has a sensitivity and
specificity related to it, which is where you've gone.
And that's exactly right. So,
that's why we've set the threshold, where we think is appropriate
to make sure that sensitivity and specificity is right for that test.
So will this change create a situation where any more
cancers are missed than is currently the case?
Can I just ask Dr. Sullivan? He knows the exact answer to that.
Helps to be an epidemiologist.
Thank you.
I think we're expecting to see the opposite effect.
We have a lot of patients waiting on our colonoscopy list at the moment for scopes,
and the international evidence is pretty clear about the benefit of fit for
symptomatic testing. And so it's pretty clear that when you set that threshold,
you pick up a certain number of
cancers. We're looking at all our wait lists as well, so making sure those patients
who are waiting also get access to the test.
So we're actually expecting the opposite, that we'll see more diagnosis of
cancer over this bulge as we clear out those wait lists, and then obviously get to
a steady state after that.
Will the relevant agencies publish this evidence?
The clinical guidelines.
The clinical guidelines will be published.
So the clinical guidelines are currently out for consultation with the colleges
at the moment. We're expecting those to be endorsed in the next week or
so. And the intention is to release all
those early July along with the rollout of fit for symptomatic.
Thank you.
All right. We have under two minutes to go.
We have primary requests from Dr. Vero and from Huhana.
You go, Dr. Vero. Okay. Oh.
That's a quick one. Minister,
I have made a chart
of your targets and shaded red when they have
not been met, and green when
they have been met.
Would Erica Stanford give this an F?
We're seeing year-on-year improvements against our targets, and I note that every
single target went backwards under your watch when you were the minister.
Oh, no.
There was certainly a fail-
No, actually-
Let the minister speak
... for specialist appointments that worse under you
You saw a reduction in delivery of
services. You saw wait lists balloon.
You saw wait times increase in our emergency departments.
You saw fewer children being immunized at two years of age.
That is on you.
Doesn't look like things are getting better quickly.
We are turning around the system. We've reinstated targets.
No, you're not. You're failing.
We are seeing wait times reduce, more children being fully immunized.
We are seeing progress where you saw failure.
Oh, we saved 20,000 lives during COVID.
Excellent.
All right.
On that happy note.
We'll adjourn. Thank you, Minister.
Thank you.
Thank you, members